Add a policy on version bounds (#37)
input-output-hk/cardano-engineering-handbook: policy/haskell/packaging/versioning.md

# Versioning Haskell packages

TODO: need to decide on a versioning policy

## Version bounds

**Scope**

Library components of packages which are intended to be [distributed via a package repository](./distribution.md) MUST follow this policy.
Non-library components of such packages MUST also do so if it is anticipated that they will be used downstream.

(Inversely: components of packages which are not intended to be distributed, or non-library components of packages which are not intended to be used downstream do NOT need to follow this policy).

**Known-bad bounds**

> Version bounds (both upper and lower) MUST be included when they exclude versions of dependencies that the package is know not to work with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version bounds (both upper and lower) MUST be included when they exclude versions of dependencies that the package is known not to work with.
```

> In addition, if it is discovered that a version of a dependency does not work with a version of the package that has been released to a package repository, then the package maintainer SHOULD revise the released version to include the new bound.

Reviewer: I'd say _MUST revise_, but maybe that's too strong.

Author: Yeah, I don't know that we can definitely _require_ people to do this.

**Speculative upper bounds**

> A package MAY include an upper bound that excludes the next major version of a dependency, even if it is not known that the next major version will the package (e.g. because it has not been released yet).

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit strange. I think the `even ...` part is the actual reason to include an upper bound. What about:

```suggestion
A package MAY include an upper bound that excludes the next major version of a dependency, for example because it is not known that the next major version will be compatible with the package (e.g. because it has not been released yet).
```

Author: I meant to say: a speculative upper bound might be incorrect, because it may be that the next version _won't_ break you. You can't know that until it's released. So it's okay to put it in, even if it might be wrong (because it's too strict).

**Cardano dependencies**

> A package MUST pin the major version of any Cardano package that it depends on.

Reviewer: :+1: or should we also include non `cardano` packages, e.g. `io-classes` etc.

**Intra-repository dependencies**

A set of packages defined in the same source repository MUST include version bounds which are as tight as necessary to ensure that they function correctly when distributed via a package repository.
Typically this will mean pinning the major version.

**Implied bounds**

A component MAY omit bounds that it is otherwise required to have if those bounds are implied by other dependencies that the package has within the same repository.

### Examples

**Using version bounds**

Package P contains a test suite and also an executable that is used to inspect binary blobs that can be produced by using P.
The test suite is not intended to be used downstream, but the executable is, since it can be helpful for users to diagnose the products of P.
Hence the test suite does not need bounds, but the executable does.

**Discovering an incompatible version**

> The developer of package P, which depends on library L, tries to build with `L-N`. 

Reviewer: It was a bit confusing what `L-N` means.  I eventually got that `N` is version number of package `L`. Using `L == N` would be more consistent, but I am not sure if it would universally less confusing.

Or maybe:
```suggestion
The developer of package P, which depends on library L, tries to build with version `N` of `L` (denoted by `L-N`). 
```

Author: going to do `pkg-a-N` which should hopefully distinguish the pkg name from the version, and be familiar from hackage etc.

This fails, so the developer either:
1. Adds an upper bound of `L < N`, since `L-N` is known not to work; or
2. Fixes P to work with `L-N`, and if this means that P will now no longer work with earlier versions of L, adds a lower bound of `L >= N`.

**Discovering an incompatible version for an upstream dependency**

The developer of package Q, which depends on `P-M`, tries to build with `L-N`.
This fails when building P, so the developer of Q notifies the developer of P. 
The developer of P then:
1. Revises `P-M` to have a bound of `L < N`; and 
2. Adds a bound of `L < N` to the development branch of P if it still applies.

**Setting version bounds within a repository**

Packages P and Q are defined in the same source repository, and P depends on Q. 
Package P is at version 1.1.2, package Q is at version 2.4.3, and they both follow the PVP.
Then P should bound its dependency on Q to `Q == 2.4.*`

**Omitting implied bounds**

Package P has both a library component and an executable component, both of which are used downstream.

> Both components depend on `L-N`, and do not work with `L-N+1**, and the executable depends on the library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both components depend on `L-N`, and do not work with `L-N+1`, and the executable depends on the library.
```

or should it be `L-(N+1)` :wink:

Author: That would be clearer indeed!

In this case it is acceptable to only put the bound on the library.

### Rationale

**Scope**

Non-library components are much less critical, because they cannot be depended upon, and it is rarer that someone will want to e.g. run the tests or benchmarks for an upstream package.
However, it can still be the case that this happens, especially for executables, which are sometimes explicitly intended to be used by downstream users.
For this reason we tie the choice over whether to include bounds to the decision of the maintainer over whether the component is intended to be used downstream.

**Known-bad bounds**

> Excluding dependency versions which are *known** not to work is a cheap way to convey information to downstream users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Excluding dependency versions which are *known* not to work is a cheap way to convey information to downstream users.
```

> It means that if they try to use the non-working version then they will get a solver error from cabal, instead of a compilation error.

Reviewer: we hope they are clearer than compilation errors ... :wink: :grin:
